The godfather of AI is so terrified of
his creation, he is now tidying up his
affairs. He believes that we maybe, I
guess by now, have four years left. He
thinks there is a greater than 50%
chance of AI taking over. So I actually
think the risk is more than 50% of the
existential threat. Imagine NASA's chief
planetary defense officer estimating a
greater than 50% chance of an asteroid
wiping out humanity in the next 4 years.
But why? We have examples like Deepseek
R1 teaching itself a novel reasoning
technique entirely on its own. We're
witnessing an AI have an original
insight without any prompting or
instruction. It's not copying humans.
It's thinking independently. And that
self-awareness is happening much faster
than researchers predicted. It is
strikingly plausible that by 2027 models
will be able to do the work of an AI
researcher or engineer. That doesn't
require believing in sci-fi. It just
requires believing in straight lines on
a graph. This video is based on the
report by ex OpenAI researcher Leopold
Ashen Brener. According to Washington
insiders, the report is circulating
among senior officials. Find the full
paper in the description. Only 2 years
ago, OpenAI released GPT4 and it shook
the very foundation of what we believed
AI was capable of. GPT4 was an AI system
that could write code and essays, could
reason through difficult math problems,
and ace college exams. A few years ago,
most thought these were impenetrable
walls. A decade earlier, models could
barely identify simple images of cats
and dogs. Four years earlier, GPT2 could
barely string together semi-plausible
sentences. Now, we're rapidly reaching a
point where we can't even design
benchmarks difficult enough to challenge
frontier AI models. Benchmarks used to
take decades to crack and now often take
just months. These models are acing
everything we can throw at them. There
have been people who have seen this for
far longer. They were scoffed at, but
all they did was trust the trend lines.
The trend lines are intense and they
were right. To appreciate just how far
we've come in such a short time,
consider this evolution. In 2019, GPT2
was the equivalent of a preschooler who
could barely count to five. Just one
year later, GPT3 could tell actual
coherent stories and write simple code
comparable to an elementary school
student. By 2022, GPT4 had leaped to
producing complex code and solving
advanced high school math problems,
outscoring most humans on standardized
tests. We've witnessed AI progress go
from preschooler to gifted high schooler
in just 4 years. The pace of advancement
in AI compared to other fields is
unprecedented in human history. The
progress over the the recent scale is
quite amazing. Our our very first
reasoning was like a top 1 millionth
competitive programmer in the world.
People thought that was very impressive.
It's like wow in AI it's you know in the
millionth best people that do this.
That's pretty good. We then had a model
that got to like top 10,000. Uh 03 is
the 175th best program competitive
programmer in the world. I think our
internal benchmark is now around 50 and
maybe we'll hit number one by the end of
this year. So that's like an amazing
rate of scale for more compute in this
new paradigm and we don't see any signs
of that stopping. The godfather of AI,
Jeffrey Hinton, warns that every few
years they say, "Hey, neural nets are
overhyped and it's all about to come
crashing down and stop and they've been
wrong every time." Soon we won't be able
to measure how competent an AI is by
giving it tests. Dan Hendris also
created humanity's last exam, the most
challenging AI benchmark ever. It's
composed of 3,000 questions that seem
like complete gibberish to everyone but
the most experienced domain experts.
Once AI can solve problems that only the
top in their field can comprehend, it
becomes too difficult to design even
harder tests. Just think about how crazy
that is for a second. We're already
shifting to measuring AI agents ability
to make money rather than test scores.
OpenAI's latest benchmark already
evaluates if Frontier LM can earn $1
million from real world freelance
software engineering tasks. Yes, AIS are
already 40% of the way to becoming
self-made millionaires. Initially,
Frontier AI models couldn't score over
10% on humanity's last exam. 2 weeks
later, OpenI's Deep Research scored 26%.
At the current rate of progress, experts
predict that humanity's last exam will
most likely be solved within the next 1
to two years. But how did this seemingly
impossible acceleration happen? The
magic of deep learning is that it just
works. The trend lines have been
astonishingly consistent despite
naysayers at every turn. The next few
years will bring another leap as
dramatic as GPT2 to GPT4, potentially
taking us from high school to PhD level
intelligence across all domains. Three
main drivers of AI progress make this
possible. Let's dive into the first
computing power. When looking at how
OpenAI trains Sora, notice that at the
base compute, you start seeing vague
outlines of images, but scale it up to
32x and they transform completely.
Picture a single computer. Now imagine a
warehouse filled with them. Then
visualize thousands of warehouses
worldwide, all dedicated to a single
purpose, training increasingly smarter
AI systems. Let's take a look at why
this seemingly simple approach throw
more computers at the problem has worked
so well over the last decade. The most
famous example is Moore's law. For
decades, this law predicted that
computer processing power would double
roughly every two years. An increase of
about 1 to one and a half per decade. We
can count thems or orders of magnitude
of improvement. A 3x improvement is 0.5.
10x is 1 and 100x is 2 and so on. It's
hard to understate just how big of an
impact this has had on society, but AI
compute growth has completely blown
Moore's law out of the water. We're now
seeing improvements that are five times
faster than Moore's law predicted. Yes,
five times faster than Moore's law. But
even this pales in comparison to what's
coming. OpenAI and the US government
have already announced plans for Project
Stargate, a data center rollout plus a
training run rumored to use 3M or 1,000
times more compute than GPT4 with an
estimated budget exceeding hundred
billion. Yes, 1,000 times more than GPT4
all in the next few years. The growth is
so extreme that we have to use
logarithmic charts just to display it on
a single graph. But when we convert this
to a regular linear scale, the true
magnitude becomes clear. It's quite
literally off the charts. While compute
gets most of the headlines, algorithmic
efficiency, the ability to do more with
less, has been quietly revolutionizing
AI. It's the second main driver of AI
progress. Think of it like developing
better learning techniques instead of
just studying longer. It's just as
important as computing power, but
relatively underappreciated. Let's look
at a concrete example. Going back to the
math benchmark, in just 2 years, the
cost to achieve 50% accuracy on this
test plummeted by a factor of 1,000 or
3. What once required a massive data
center can now be accomplished on your
iPhone. Algorithmic progress in the
moment often feels random. Think Newton
stumbling upon the theory of gravity by
watching an apple fall from a tree. But
when you zoom out enough, you can see
the long run trend is remarkably
consistent. You have slow growth, then
rapid growth, then a leveling off as the
particular paradigm matures. Over the
past decade, researchers have found that
we've consistently gained a half anom of
compute efficiency per year. 1 of
compute efficiency means that we can run
a model at the same level of
effectiveness for 10 times lower cost.
To put this in perspective, what
required 10 GPUs 2 years ago can now be
done with just one. Leopold Ashen
Brener's analysis shows that the
algorithmic efficiency gains between
GPT2 and GPT4 were massive, roughly 1
to2 of effective compute gains. That
means a 10 to 100 times cheaper model
just because researchers discovered some
better algorithms. If this trend
continues, and there's no sign it's
slowing down, by 2027, we'll be able to
run a GPT4 level AI for 100 times
cheaper. Imagine this. If cars had
improved at AI's rate, a $50,000 Tesla
would cost $500 and travel as fast as a
rocket in just 4 years. These
perspective estimates aren't set in
stone, though. As we find more
breakthroughs, it becomes harder to find
the next one. We might fall short of
these estimates. However, it's also just
as possible we might surpass them with
breakthroughs that accelerate this
process even faster. The transformer
architecture was introduced in 2017 and
delivered a t-fold improvement in
efficiency, doubling the yearly usual
gain in a single breakthrough. Of
course, every exponential growth story
faces potential limitations. What used
to be one of the most widely discussed
concerns is what experts called the data
wall, where we might run out of useful
training data for the AI models. It was
a compelling argument. After all,
there's only so much highquality human
generated content in the world that the
models can learn from. But recent
breakthroughs by Deep Seeks R1 in
OpenAIS03 proved we likely already found
ways around this limitation. As Goran
notes, much of the point of a model like
01 is not to deploy it, but to generate
training data for the next model. Every
problem that an 01 solves is now a
training data point for 03. This creates
a self-improving cycle where each
generation trains the next, effectively
demolishing the data wall through
synthetic data generation. We're now
witnessing AI systems that improve
themselves faster than human engineers
could improve them. The third and most
unpredictable driver of AI progress is
what Leopold Ashen Brener calls
unhoblings, where we remove limitations
that hold AI systems back from using
their incredible raw intelligence. For
example, imagine you're trying to solve
a complex math problem with one major
restriction. You must blurt out the
first answer that comes to mind. You
can't use paper or show your work.
That's how early AI models operated. To
solve this, researchers started giving
LLMs their own chain of thought,
allowing AIS to break down problems step
by step, dramatically improving their
problem solving abilities. All it took
to solve an obvious hobbling was a small
algorithmic tweak. Deepseeks R1 and
OpenAI's 01 and 03 are a continuation of
this. We were able to unhubble them by
letting them think about a problem for
even longer, for minutes instead of
seconds. But perhaps the most striking
example of an unhoubbling came with the
leap from GPT 3.5 to ChatGpt.
Researchers were able to go from a base
model to a useful chatbot because of
reinforcement learning from human
feedback or RLHF. An RLHF small model
was equivalent to a non Rlf 100 times
larger model. Right now, leading AI labs
are racing to implement the next major
unhobling technique, giving their models
what researchers call scaffolding.
Rather than just asking a model to solve
a problem, have one model make a plan of
attack, have another propose a bunch of
possible solutions, have another
critique it, and so on. It's similar to
how a team of experts might tackle a
complex project, and it massively
improves performance on benchmarks.
Without scaffolding, AIs won't make the
leap from being chat bots to drop in
remote workers. Giving AIs access to
tools can skyrocket their performance
almost overnight. Imagine trying to
multiply 463 by 78 in your head or drive
somewhere without GPS. AIS without tools
face similar limitations. OpenAI's Deep
Research scored 26% on humanity's last
exam when their model was allowed to
browse the internet and use Python for
coding. But OpenAI's 03 Mini scored 15%
for comparison. Another critical
limitation researchers are working on is
the context length. The amount of
information an AI can keep in its memory
at once. When GPT3 was first released,
it could only process about 2,000
tokens. One token is roughly equivalent
to about one word. So approximately four
pages of text. GPT4 expanded this to
32,000 tokens or about 64 pages. Gemini
1.5 Pro shattered all expectations with
a context window of 1 million tokens,
easily 10 large books worth of text.
Gemini 1.5 Pro was even able to learn a
new language, a low resource language
not on the internet, from scratch, just
by putting a dictionary and grammar
reference materials in context. Imagine
dropping a new employee into a software
company. No matter how brilliant they
are, they can't be effective without
first understanding the codebase,
reading documentation, and learning from
their co-workers. AI faces the same
challenge. And the difference between
2,000 tokens then and 1 million tokens
now is like the difference between
remembering only your last meeting
versus recalling every conversation from
your entire first month on the job.
Perhaps the most significant recent
breakthrough in unhubbling comes from a
fundamental shift in how we scale AI
systems. Traditionally, we'd feed the
model the entire internet in every book
ever written, piling on as much data as
possible. This approach, called
pre-training, is like trying to create a
genius by stuffing their brain with as
much info as possible. But we've hit
diminishing returns with pre-training.
However, researchers have discovered the
next leading paradigm, post-training
improvements. They're continuing to
teach existing AIs after the base model
has already been trained. One of the
biggest new post-training improvements
is surprisingly simple. The ability to
think longer before responding. When
OpenAI tested their unreleased O3 model,
they allowed it to spend 30 minutes of
thinking time on the ARC AGI benchmark
rather than forcing 03 to answer
immediately. To put this in perspective,
these models think roughly 50 times
faster than humans. This is like giving
someone 25 hours to carefully consider a
single question on a test. A survey by
Epoch AI found that these unhoblings
made AI systems 5 to 30 times more
powerful. For scale, these improvements
rival the gains from both massive
computing power increases and
breakthrough algorithmic advances.
Today's most advanced AI models are
still significantly hobbled. Consider
what remains to be unlocked. They don't
have long-term memory. Their ability to
use tools is extremely limited. While
OpenAI's operator allows basic computer
use, it still gets confused and stuck
all the time. They can mostly only
engage in short back and forth
dialogues. Rather than going away for a
day or a week, thinking about a problem,
researching different approaches,
consulting other humans, and then
writing you a longer report or poll
request. They're mostly not personalized
to you, just a generic chat bot with a
short prompt, rather than having all the
relevant background on your company and
your work. If you're imagining GPD6 in
2027 as just a more intelligent version
of today's chatbt, you're missing the
bigger picture. We're not moving toward
better chat bots. We're moving toward
true AI agents that can function like
skilled remote co-workers. But to
achieve this transformation, researchers
need to solve the onboarding problem.
GPT4 has the raw intelligence to handle
many professional tasks, but it doesn't
have any relevant context. Hasn't read
the company docs or Slack history or had
conversations with members of the team.
A smart new hire isn't that useful 5
minutes after arriving, but they are
quite useful a month in. It seems like
it should be possible, for example, via
very long context to onboard models like
we would a new human coworker. Right
now, Chat GBT is like a smart high
schooler trapped in an isolated box that
you can only text with. But with
multimodal models like OpenAI's
operator, you have AI systems that can
interact with computers much like humans
do. Future AI systems will have digital
avatars to join video calls, conduct
research, collaborate with colleagues,
and use the same software tools as human
workers. They'll be true digital
colleagues who can independently handle
complex projects from start to finish.
This unhoubling process could create a
sonic boom effect in AI adoption.
Companies today must build extensive
custom infrastructure to make AI systems
useful in the workplace. But once these
limitations are removed, implementing AI
might become as simple as clicking the
add new remote team member button. You
can see here the distinction between
what we currently have and what is
projected in future models. The leap
from chatbot to true AI agent is driven
by even larger improvements across all
three factors. What Leopold Ashen Brener
is projecting for 2027 isn't just
another incremental improvement. It's a
transformation as dramatic as the leap
from GPD2 to GPT4. Think about that
comparison for a moment. GPD2 could
barely write coherent sentences, while
GPT4 can ace advanced exams and write
sophisticated code. This next leap could
potentially launch AI's past PhD level
expertise across a wide variety of
fields. The math is striking. We're
expecting a total increase of 5MS in
effective compute combined with major
breakthroughs in removing AI's current
limitations. That's a 100,000 times
increase. To grasp the sheer magnitude
of this improvements, if GPT4 required 3
months to train, a model with GPT4 level
capabilities in 2027 could be trained in
just 1 minute. What makes this
particularly significant is the
possibility of AI beginning to improve
itself. Once these systems can
effectively perform AI research,
something the trend lines suggest could
happen by 2027, the pace of progress
could become unfathomable. Imagine tens
of thousands of AI researchers working
around the clock, potentially
compressing a decade of algorithmic
progress into a single year. This isn't
just about creating a more sophisticated
version of chatbt. We're talking about
systems that could automate all
cognitive jobs. As with every generation
before them, every new generation of
models will dumbfound most onlookers.
They'll be incredulous when very soon
models solve incredibly difficult
science problems that would take PhDs
days. when they're whizzing around your
computer doing your job. When they're
writing code bases with millions of
lines of code from scratch, when every
year or two the economic value generated
by these models 10xes, it won't be
longer before they're smarter than us.
Forget sci-fi, count thems. It's what we
should expect. AGI is no longer a
distant fantasy. Scaling up simple deep
learning techniques has just worked. The
models just want to learn and we're
about to do another
100,000x the end of
2027. Hey, I'm Drew. For a deeper dive
into the timeline for achieving AGI,
check out this video next. I'm a small
channel and this video took me a month
to make, so your support really helps
out. Thanks a lot.